Adding "Why Radius?" concept doc (#827)
radius-project/docs: docs/content/concepts/why-radius-concept/index.md

---
type: docs
title: "Why Radius?"
linkTitle: "Why Radius?"
description: "Describes the motivations for creating Radius."
weight: 300
---

## Our starting point

> We started the Radius project to simplify and improve upon the tools that application developers use to deploy and manage applications. Our goal at first was just to create a platform for deployment that developers would love using. As we had conversations and researched, we quickly realized that almost every enterprise is creating a custom internal developer platform to standardize and modernize the way that developers think about their jobs.

Reviewer: Would this feel stronger if it read, "to deploy and manage cloud-native applications"?

Author: I think that's a lot more specific and accurate, will update.

> We started the Radius project to simplify and improve upon the tools that application developers use to deploy and manage applications. Our goal at first was just to create a platform for deployment that developers would love using. As we had conversations and researched, we quickly realized that almost every enterprise is creating a custom internal developer platform to standardize and modernize the way that developers think about their jobs.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We started Radius to simplify and improve upon tools application developers use to deploy and manage applications. Our initial goal was just to create a platform for deployment that developers would love but, as we talked to more customers, we realized almost every enterprise is creating a custom internal developer platform to standardize and modernize the way developers think about their jobs.
```

Author: Reminder: OSS projects don't have customers 😆 they have users. I'm going to change this to `cloud customers` to make it clear that it's not `customers` in the Radius context.

> Most enterprises are not dev-tools experts and as a result they struggle with the cost and complexity of building a home-grown solution. If we could use open-source to solve the same problems enterprises were solving we could have a big impact.

Reviewer: Love this paragraph since it really sums up why we have such a positive response from customers about Radius. What do you think about the second sentence reading, "If we could provide an open-source solution that solved these problems for enterprises we could have a big impact."

A few common problems rose to the top:

- Applications are more than just Kubernetes: applications developers are tasked with managing applications on Kubernetes and resources in the cloud where complexity is high, and compliance with best-practices is a full-time job.

> - Developers and platform engineers need to collaborate: to manage the complexity of the cloud, enterprises have specialized disciplines like sec-ops, fin-ops, and centers of excellence. Application developers need to interface with all of these roles, and the tools they use should aid, not impede collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Developers and platform engineers need to collaborate: to manage the complexity of the cloud, enterprises have specialized disciplines like sec-ops, fin-ops, and cloud centers of excellence. Application developers need to interface with all of these roles, and the tools they use should aid, not impede collaboration.
```

Reviewer: We've spoken about IT Operators and Platform Engineers in our documents. Should we standardize on one or use one more consistently? Here we talk about platform engineers and below we talk about IT Operators. Perhaps higher in the document we could say something about "IT teams are becoming increasingly sophisticated with  platform engineering emerging as a group taking a product approach to building internal cloud development platforms." Or something like that.

Author: I think the separation between platform engineers and IT operators is still _somewhat_ useful. (weak opinion weakly held)

In my mind I think about the separation this way:

- Platform engineers are taking a product approach to building the internal platform...
- IT Operators are responsible for support, troubleshooting, management of cloud accounts. This group definitely has some subdivisions and specialties as well. I'd put SRE in this group.

Author: I updated this to include both platform engineering and operators. Better or worse?

- Applications need a industry-standard definition: the IT operators, SREs and other specialists that support an application usually lack context about the architecture. Application developers lack context about the underlying cloud infrastructure. As application developers and IT operators collaborate they need a common understanding and vizualization of what an application **is**.

So, we started Radius to address these concerns and provide **our** opinions about how application management should work in today's complex cloud-native landscape. Along the way we came up with the concept of **Appi-ness**: the feeling of satisfaction one has when the application is at the center of every workflow.

## Applications are more than just Kubernetes

> The modern cloud-native application includes much more than Kubernetes, applications use databases, message queues, identity systems, SaaS accounts, and observability platforms. However most of the tools that are available for developers are focused on the Kubernetes basics of compute, storage, and networking.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The modern cloud-native application includes much more than Kubernetes. Applications use databases, message queues, identity systems, SaaS accounts, and observability platforms. However, most of the tools that are available for developers are focused on the Kubernetes basics of compute, storage, and networking.
```

Our philosophy is to be inclusive when considering what is *part of the application*. Developers can use cloud resources directly or use Recipes configured by operators for on-demand provisioning of infrastructure. We automate best-practices like IAM/identity assignment, permissions management, diagnostics, and networking configuration based on the application architecture and developer intent. We hope that features like Connections feel like magic when its easy to wire up your dependencies.  IT operators control the templates and credentials used to interact with the cloud ensuring that provisioning is done in a supported way.

## Developers and platform engineers need to collaborate

> Enterprises are creating specialized roles and initiatives to design the developer experience that are often referred to as platform engineering. Most often this looks like a platform engineering team supporting repository templates, cloud resource templates, and a software catalog for application developers to use. Unfortunately, the tools and assets that are frequently used don't encourage collaboration.

Author: Would like some suggestions about how to punch this up, or feedback on whether this is even the right point. 

I don't think I've landed on a strong and concise problem statement yet.

> Enterprises are creating specialized roles and initiatives to design the developer experience that are often referred to as platform engineering. Most often this looks like a platform engineering team supporting repository templates, cloud resource templates, and a software catalog for application developers to use. Unfortunately, the tools and assets that are frequently used don't encourage collaboration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Enterprises are creating specialized roles and initiatives to improve their speed, efficiency, and security when adopting the cloud. Platform engineering is an emerging discipline that's combining a product mindset with learnings from DevOps and DevSecOps teams to create internal development platforms. When successful, platform engineers deliver a set of tools that provide sufficient automation, tracking, governance, and observability that guide development teams naturally fall “into the pit of success.” Often these endeavors can come up a little short, looking like a set of repository templates, cloud resource templates, and a software catalog for application developers to use. Unfortunately, the tools and assets that are frequently used don't encourage collaboration between developers and the platform engineers supporting those developers.
```

Reviewer: Does that feel better?

Author: A little bit. I'm going to combine some of your suggestions with an idea I had, and we can see if its better.

Author: The thing I added here is like this:

> Platform engineering is new as a discipline, and the patterns that will make enterprises successful long-term are still emerging.

What I wanted to capture is that everyone's still figuring this out. We're showing up with some opinions that will be useful. 

Feel free to suggest further changes if we could be clearer on that point.

Reviewer: I like the way you've phrased it there, "a new discipline" and "still emerging"

Radius provides concepts like Environments and Recipes that support a separation of concerns. Platform engineers can create repository templates with CI/CD pipelines and starter code for deployment. IT operators can deploy and govern the Environments where those pipelines deploy applications. Cloud experts can provide the Recipes used to create and update cloud resources. Developers are only responsible for describing the requirements and architecture of the application, understanding which environments to use, and choosing dependencies from the supported set of Recipes.

## Applications need an industry-standard definition

> The myriad of operational roles that support applications in production rarely have the full picture of how the application is architected or a complete picture of the infrastructure resources that are in use. It can be difficult for an organization to understand the impact of an outage or what is causing high consumption and high cost for a cloud resource without a holistic understanding. Unless developers are creating the cloud resources themselves, its hard for them to understand the real infrastructure at work. Teams are adopting software catalogs to help address these problems but there is always drift between the catalog and the source of truth.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The myriad of operational roles that support applications in production rarely have the full picture of how the application is architected or a complete picture of the infrastructure resources that are in use. It can be difficult for an organization to understand the impact of an outage or what is causing high consumption and high cost for a cloud resource without a holistic understanding of the application. Unless developers are creating the cloud resources themselves, its hard for them to understand the real infrastructure at work. Teams are adopting software catalogs to help address these problems but there is always drift between the catalog and the source of truth.
```

> We wanted to do better by building a flexible and customizable picture of what an application *is*. To do this we capture the developer's understanding of the application during deployment and combine that picture with the cloud resources and Recipes used to provision the infrastructure. This data is used to build the Application Graph, a new kind of software catalog that describes the application's architecture, communication patterns, and dependencies as a shared view for the whole organization.

Reviewer: This is a beautiful description of the Application Graph.

Author: xD

We hope that this holistic way of thinking about applications becomes the standard and that together with the rest of the cloud-native ecosystem we can build a set of tools that promote **Appi-ness**.

## What we're not rethinking

Many practices and technologies in cloud-native development are a success and don't need to be re-thought. 

- Radius makes it easy for application developers to adopt by supporting your existing containerized code, Dockerfiles, and Helm charts. 
- We believe that 12-factor is still a great set of ideas and so any 12-factor style application should be easy to use with Radius.
- We like infrastructure-as-code as for its repeatability and use it for both Recipes and application descriptions. 
- There are plenty of great CI/CD systems, application delivery pipelines, and Gitops systems out there and Radius can work with any of them.

## Open Source

> @ryanwaite - what would you think about your section on OSS being included here instead?

Reviewer: Thanks for the question. I've been thinking about how we're open source as a way of _supporting_ an enterprise's multi-cloud strategy. I updated the text on open source to try to highlight this a little more. Could you take a look at the new draft and let me know what you think? I think the open source section is stronger with the multi-cloud text but perhaps I'm wrong.

Author: After reviewing your draft, I really liked the way it fit in. I'm going to write some new content to go here instead.

---
type: docs

> title: "Why Radius?"

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: "Concept: Why Radius?"
```

As a convention we've been putting the document type in the header to assist with titles, linking, and searching

linkTitle: "Why Radius?"
description: "Describes the motivations for creating Radius."

> weight: 300

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
weight: 300
categories: "Concept"
```

---

## Our starting point

We started Radius to simplify and improve upon tools application developers use to deploy and manage applications. Our initial goal was just to create a platform for deployment that developers would love but, as we talked to more cloud customers, we realized almost every enterprise is creating a custom internal developer platform to standardize the way they deploy and manage cloud-native applications

Most enterprises are not dev-tools experts and as a result they struggle with the cost and complexity of building a home-grown solution. If we could provide an open-source solution that solved these problems for enterprises we could have a big impact.

A few common problems rose to the top:

> - Applications are more than just Kubernetes: applications developers are tasked with managing applications on Kubernetes and resources in the cloud where complexity is high, and compliance with best-practices is a full-time job.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Applications are more than just Kubernetes: standardizing on Kubernetes has been a successful strategy for most enterprises, but applications developers are tasked with managing applications on Kubernetes along with multiple resources in the cloud. Integrating Kubernetes with cloud services has added additional complexity while making compliance with best-practices almost a full-time job.
```

Reviewer: That might be too much in terms of the edits so feel free to ignore.

- Developers, platform engineers, and  IT operators need to collaborate: to manage the complexity of the cloud, enterprises have specialized disciplines like sec-ops, fin-ops, and cloud centers of excellence. Application developers need to interface with all of these roles, and the tools they use should aid, not impede collaboration.

> - Applications need a industry-standard definition: the IT operators, SREs and other specialists that support an application usually lack context about the architecture. Application developers lack context about the underlying cloud infrastructure. As application developers and IT operators collaborate they need a common understanding and visualization of what an application **is**.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- **Applications are more than just Kubernetes**: applications developers are tasked with managing applications on Kubernetes and resources in the cloud where complexity is high, and compliance with best-practices is a full-time job.
- **Developers, platform engineers, and  IT operators need to collaborate**: to manage the complexity of the cloud, enterprises have specialized disciplines like sec-ops, fin-ops, and cloud centers of excellence. Application developers need to interface with all of these roles, and the tools they use should aid, not impede collaboration.
- **Applications need a industry-standard definition**: the IT operators, SREs and other specialists that support an application usually lack context about the architecture. Application developers lack context about the underlying cloud infrastructure. As application developers and IT operators collaborate they need a common understanding and visualization of what an application **is**.
```

> - Applications need a industry-standard definition: the IT operators, SREs and other specialists that support an application usually lack context about the architecture. Application developers lack context about the underlying cloud infrastructure. As application developers and IT operators collaborate they need a common understanding and visualization of what an application **is**.

Reviewer: Can you share more about why you used the phrase, "industry-standard definition." Reading it, I think about standards organizations building a schema for app definitions.

Author: I thought we use this phrase pretty often.....

I also agree that there's a risk confusing our statement with Standards organizations like ISO and OASIS, but I figured we already agreed this phrase was ok.

Author: I **standardized** this language on `common industry-wide definition` That should convey the same meaning without troubling implications.

So, we started Radius to address these concerns and provide **our** opinions about how application management should work in today's complex cloud-native landscape. Along the way we came up with the concept of **Appi-ness**: the feeling of satisfaction one has when the application is at the center of every workflow.

## Applications are more than just Kubernetes

> The modern cloud-native application includes much more than Kubernetes. Applications use databases, message queues, identity systems, SaaS accounts, and observability platforms. However, most of the tools that are available for developers are focused on the Kubernetes basics of compute, storage, and networking.

Reviewer: This is really beautifully stated.

We wanted to do better by building a flexible and customizable picture of what an application *is*. To do this we capture the developer's understanding of the application during deployment and combine that picture with the cloud resources and Recipes used to provision the infrastructure. This data is used to build the Application Graph, a new kind of software catalog that describes the application's architecture, communication patterns, and dependencies as a shared view for the whole organization.

We hope that this holistic way of thinking about applications becomes the standard and that together with the rest of the cloud-native ecosystem we can build a set of tools that promote **Appi-ness**.

## What we're not rethinking

Many practices and technologies in cloud-native development are a success and don't need to be re-thought. 

> - Radius makes it easy for application developers to adopt by supporting your existing containerized code, Dockerfiles, and Helm charts. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Radius is easy for application developers to adopt because it supports existing containerized code, Dockerfiles, and Helm charts. 
```

> - We believe that 12-factor is still a great set of ideas and so any 12-factor style application should be easy to use with Radius.

Reviewer 3: Looks like https://12factor.net/ uses "twelve-factor" as the spelling throughout their site: 
```suggestion
- We believe that [twelve-factor](https://12factor.net/) is still a great set of ideas and so any twelve-factor style application should be easy to use with Radius.
```

- We like infrastructure-as-code as for its repeatability and use it for both Recipes and application descriptions. 
- There are plenty of great CI/CD systems, application delivery pipelines, and Gitops systems out there and Radius can work with any of them.

> ## Open-source from the start

Reviewer 3: Optional suggestion if we want to make open-governance a header-worthy point
 
```suggestion
## Open-source and open-governance from the start
```

Author: We're not doing open governance from the start 😉
